As a generic game console emulating many classic ones, the FunKey
requires numerous buttons:

 - A soft "ON/OFF" button
 - A "**+**" control pad with "Up", "Down", "Left" and "Right" buttons
 - A "**X**" control pad with "A", "B", "X" and "Y" buttons
 - "Start" and a "Fn" buttons
 - At least L1 and R1 shoulder buttons

As can be seen in the page on the [PMIC][1], the soft "ON/OFF" button
is directly connected to the power management chip, so we are left
with 4 + 4 + 2 = 12 buttons for game control.

After testing tactile domes in our [**FunKey Zero**][2] prototype, we
decided to go back to integrated tactile switches, as their placement
is much easier using a regular SMT pick & place machine like any other
components on the PCB, whereas the separate tactile domes required an
adhesive tape to be place manually with less accuracy.

![EVBPBB1AAB000](/assets/images/EVPBB1AAB000.png){: align=left }

The [Mitsumi BYS-055A1x12][3] is the same footprint (2.5mm x 1.6mm x
0.55mm) as the more expensive Panasonic EVBBBxAAB00 tactile switches,
with a 1.2N actuating force for the "**+**" and "**X**" pads, and a
1.6N actuating force for the "Start", "Fn" and "ON/OFF" buttons. We
found these actuating force the best match to provide a good feedback
to the user.

![EVP-AEBB2A-1](/assets/images/EVP-AEBB2A-1.jpg){: align=left }

For the rear left and right shoulder buttons, we exeperimented several
models between PCBA rev. C, D and E, until we eventually decided for a
[replacement for the expensive Panasonic EVP-AEBB2A-1][4]:

This one as an actuating force of 1.6N.

## GPIO Requirements

The Allwinner v3s CPU comes in a large 128-pin TQFP package, with a
lot of exposed (51!) GPIO pins:

 - PB0 to PB9 (10)
 - PC0 to PC3 (4)
 - PE0 to PE24 (25)
 - PF0 to PF5 (6)
 - PG0 to PG5 (6)

The FunKey specializes some of them for specific interfaces like
SDCard, PWM, SPI and I2C buses, console UART, but most of them are
left available for I/Os.

## GPIO Expander

But for the **FunKey S** device and given the small PCB size, wiring
all the buttons directly to the V3s puts a lot of constraints on the
PCB routing, at such a point that we decided to use a dedicated I2C
GPIO expander chip to relieve the burden from the main V3s CPU.

We use a common chip for this purpose, that is well supported in the
Linux kernel: the [NXP PCAL6416AHF.128][5]. It is marketed as a
"low-voltage translating 16-bit I2C-bus/SMBus I/O expander with
interrupt output, reset, and configuration registers" that just
matches exactly our needs.

As a bonus, this chip features software-controlable internal
pull-up/pull-down resistors, so we don't need to add external ones to
fix the defaut button states.

The connection with the V3s CPU is achieved using standard I2C clock
(SCL) and data (SDA) signals, plus an additional IRQ signal driven by
the I/O expander when pre-programmed conditions are met, such as a key
press / release event. A RESET signal is used to initialize the chip
when required.

## Schematics

Here is the corresponding main schematic for the buttons:

![Main Button Schematics](/assets/images/Main_Button_Schematics.png){.lightbox}

The main component is of course the I/O expander **U1**, with the
control signals to the CPU/PMIC on the north side.

The chip's /INT signal is pulled up to the +3V3 power supply by the
resistor **R1**, such that the active-low interrupt signal is disabled
by default.

The I/O expander chip features 2 separate power supplies VDD and VDDP
for the core and peripheral respectively, each decoupled by a bulk
capacitor **C1** and **C2**.

Except for the GPIO I/Os, the only remaining pin is the ADDR pin 18
which provides the I2C address LSB bit, so that you can address 2
PCAL6416AHF.128 chips on the same I2C bus by wiring this pin
differently.

!!! tip

    One oddity is that the pin 6 (P0_5) is connected to the /RESET
    signal: it is a routing trick to get this signal to go through
    this pin pad, as it was very difficult to access it otherwise...

The "Start" and "Select" buttons **S1** and **S2** are 2 low-profile
SMT tactile switches, each featuring an ESD protection TVS diode
**D8** and **D5**, as these buttons are of course accessible by the
user!

The other buttons are wired in the same fashion:

![Secondary Button Schematics](/assets/images/Secondary_Button_Schematics.png){.lightbox}

The "U", "L", "D", "R", "A", "B", "X" and "Y" buttons **S3**, **S4**,
**S5**, **S6**, **S8**, **S9**, **S10** and **S11** are of the same
kind and also have a respective TVS diodes **D2**, **D3**, **D4**,
**D5**, **D6**, **D7**, **D8**, **D9**, **D10** and **D11**.

The left (**S12**) and right (**S7**) shoulder buttons are right angle
SMT tactile buttons, with their TVS diode **D1** and **D12**.

## Benefit

The main advantage of this solutions is that the 12 signals to wire
the buttons to the CPU are replaced by only 4 signals, from which 3
are shared with the other I2C peripherals (the PMIC) on the bus.

It is then much easier to route this dense PCB by delegating the
button GPIO handling to a satellite chip.

[1]: /developer_guide/hardware_reference/power/pmic
[2]: https://hackaday.io/project/134065
[3]: https://github.com/FunKey-Project/FunKey-S-Hardware/blob/master/Datasheets/Replacement%20EVP-BB1AAB000-(Operating%20force%20120GF%EF%BC%89.pdf
[4]: https://github.com/FunKey-Project/FunKey-S-Hardware/blob/master/Datasheets/replacement%20EVP-AEBB2A-1.pdf
[5]: https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/data-sheet/PCAL6416A.pdf

--8<--
includes/glossary.md
--8<--
